Full Detailed Explanation of the System
Your system is an intelligent, interactive traffic simulation platform that allows a user to describe a trip in natural language, automatically simulate that trip on a real city map (like Seattle’s Montlake area), block roads, and observe how traffic performance changes. It combines AI, geographic data, traffic simulation, and backend APIs into one cohesive workflow.

✅ 1. User Input Stage (Natural Language Command)
The system starts when a user types a sentence into the chatbot interface such as:

"I want to walk from Pike Place Market to Seattle Center for recreation."

This is sent to the FastAPI backend through a POST request to:

bash
Copy
Edit
/generate-scenario
✅ 2. Trip Understanding via Gemini AI
Your Python backend (simulator.py) takes that natural language and calls Gemini AI, which extracts the key structured elements from the sentence:

json
Copy
Edit
{
  "origin": "Pike Place Market",
  "destination": "Seattle Center",
  "mode": "Walk",
  "purpose": "Recreation"
}
This makes the system conversational and user-friendly, removing the need for manual configuration.

✅ 3. Geocoding Origin and Destination
After extracting the origin and destination names, the system calls the Nominatim API (from OpenStreetMap) to convert those names into geographic coordinates (latitude/longitude). These coordinates are needed to place the trip accurately on the A/B Street simulation map.

✅ 4. Scenario Generation
With structured trip data and coordinates, the system creates a simulation scenario JSON that describes:

The trip's origin and destination (as coordinates)

The departure time

The mode of transportation (Drive, Bike, Walk)

The trip purpose (Work, Meal, Recreation)

This scenario is saved as:

pgsql
Copy
Edit
generated_abstreet_script.json
✅ 5. Scenario Import into A/B Street
Using the A/B Street CLI tool, the saved JSON scenario is imported into the map file:

swift
Copy
Edit
data/system/us/seattle/maps/montlake.bin
This converts it into a .bin scenario file that A/B Street can simulate.

✅ 6. Running the Simulation (Headless Mode)
Your code then loads the binary scenario into the A/B Street simulator (running in "headless" mode, meaning no GUI). It tells A/B Street to simulate traffic for a realistic amount of time (1 hour after the last trip departure time).

✅ 7. Returning Roads to Frontend
After the simulation is done, the system calls:

python
Copy
Edit
fetch_road_thruput()
This function fetches the roads that were used by the trip(s), including road IDs. Then:

python
Copy
Edit
fetch_road_details()
retrieves their names, lanes, and structure so the frontend can let the user select which roads to block.

At this point, the system sends back to the frontend a list of affected roads in human-readable form so the user can make decisions:

“Which roads do you want to close?”

✅ 8. Blocking Roads and Rerunning Simulation
When the user selects roads to block, the frontend sends those road IDs to:

bash
Copy
Edit
/simulate-with-blocked-roads
Then:

Your backend fetches the current configuration of each road

Removes all lanes (representing a closure)

Sends this new edited version of the map to A/B Street

Reloads the scenario with the edited roads

Reruns the simulation again with those changes

This models what happens if those roads are closed.

✅ 9. Collecting Simulation Results
After rerunning, your system fetches detailed traffic performance metrics:

Average Travel Time

Maximum Delay

Number of Trips Completed

These metrics are then saved in a PostgreSQL database, along with:

The map used

The blocked road IDs

The original user input

The date and time of the run

This allows for long-term tracking and comparison of traffic outcomes.

🧱 Technologies and Roles
Component	Purpose
Gemini AI	Understands natural language and extracts trip data
Nominatim API	Converts place names to geographic coordinates
A/B Street CLI	Converts JSON into simulation-ready .bin format
A/B Street API	Runs the simulation, modifies the map, returns results
PostgreSQL	Stores simulation runs and results
FastAPI	Exposes API endpoints for frontend/backend communication
React Frontend	Sends user input and receives simulation results

📊 Diagram Summary (Already Provided)
The diagram shows:

Flow from user input to result

Main functions called in main.py and simulator.py

Gemini and OSM APIs in action

Scenario building → Importing → Simulation → Result storage

🎯 Final Outcome
This system gives users the power to plan and test traffic scenarios interactively, without needing any technical expertise. It:

Converts chat input into real-world simulation

Allows road closure testing

Measures the effect of closures

Saves historical simulation outcomes

It’s an excellent foundation for smart city planning, emergency routing, or transportation policy research.